R code structure (#21)
Open-Systems-Pharmacology/developer-docs: ospsuite-r-specifics/r-code-structure.md

# OSPSuite-R Package Structure

## Introduction

In this part of the documentation we will talk about the specifics of the [OSPSuite-R](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite-R) package. This is a package that offers the functionalities of OSPSuite to the R language. We will analyze its elements and code structure, as well as the components that enable us to interface between the OSPSuite codebase in the .NET universe and the R programming language. 

## OSPSuite-R communication with .NET

> As mentioned, through the OSPSuite-R package we get OSPSuite functionalities available in the R programming language. Those OSPSuite functionalities though have been developed and exist in the .NET universe. In order to provide them in R we have to enable communication between R and .NET. To do this we are currently using the [rClr package](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/rClr). This package allows the communication between R and .NET using C++ as an intermediate layer. .NET can communicate with C++ using a custom native host and C++ can then communicate with R through the R .C interface. This is why we need to have the rClr package installed in R for OSPSuite-R to work. Using rClr we can load the dlls produced from the .NET code and use them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
THe `OSPSuite-R` package offers acces to functionalities of OSPSuite that are implemented in .NET. The communication between R and .NET using C++ as an intermediate layer is provided by the [rClr package](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/rClr). .NET can communicate with C++ using a custom native host and C++ can then communicate with R through the R .C interface. Using `rClr` we can load the libraries compiled from the .NET code and use them.
```

> As mentioned, through the OSPSuite-R package we get OSPSuite functionalities available in the R programming language. Those OSPSuite functionalities though have been developed and exist in the .NET universe. In order to provide them in R we have to enable communication between R and .NET. To do this we are currently using the [rClr package](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/rClr). This package allows the communication between R and .NET using C++ as an intermediate layer. .NET can communicate with C++ using a custom native host and C++ can then communicate with R through the R .C interface. This is why we need to have the rClr package installed in R for OSPSuite-R to work. Using rClr we can load the dlls produced from the .NET code and use them.

Reviewer: Add here a high-level overview of .NET libraries that are used. That the API between `OSPSuite.Core` is implemented in `OSPSuite.R`, additionally, `PKSim.R` for calling PK-Sim specific functionalities.

Author: @PavelBal .NET libraries here you mean the OSPSuite ones, or the other .NET ones (npoi and so on)?

![Schema of OSPSuite-R and OSPSuite .NET codebase communication.](../assets/images/r_dotnet_schema.png)

## OSPSuite-R code structure

> The general file and code structure of the package follows the best practices of R packages. What is special in this package is that OSPSuite-R is strongly object-oriented. Usually R packages tend to be more functional-programming-oriented. This object-oriented tendency comes as a result of using many of the functionalities of PK-Sim and OSPSuite.Core, that are already structured in an object oriented way in .NET. 

Reviewer: Add link to "Coding standards" in R

[init-package.R](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite-R/blob/develop/R/init-package.R) on the R package side:
```
.
.
.

rClr::clrLoadAssembly(filePathFor("OSPSuite.R.dll"))

.
.
.

rClr::clrCallStatic("OSPSuite.R.Api", "InitializeOnce", apiConfig$ref)
```

[Api.cs](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite.Core/blob/develop/src/OSPSuite.R/Api.cs) in OSPSuite.Core on the .NET side:
```
.
.
.

public static void InitializeOnce(ApiConfig apiConfig)
{
    Container = ApplicationStartup.Initialize(apiConfig);
}
```
On the .NET side, the [OSPSuite.R project](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite.Core/tree/develop/src/OSPSuite.R) of OSPSuite.Core contains all the code that takes care of the necessary preparations (minimal implementations, container registrations, entry points for R calls, taks creation etc.) for the interfacing for the R package. Specifically the `InitializeOnce` function takes care of the necessary registrations and loads the dimensions and PK parameters from the corresponding xmls.

### Object oriented design and rClr encapsulation

> As already mentioned the OSPSuite-R package is strongly object oriented. In R there are various object-oriented frameworks, but in the case of OSPSuite-R we are using [R6](https://r6.r-lib.org/) to create objects and work with them. Since the .NET codebase of OSPSuite is object oriented, the calls that we do through rClr have as a result the creation of objects in the .NET universe. Then we proceed to work on those objects through getters, setter, methods etc. Those objects that get passed to the R universe through rClr we encapsulate in wrappers. Our main base wrapper class for .NET is [DotNetWrapper](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite-R/blob/develop/R/dot-net-wrapper.R). All other wrapper classes for specific types of objects ( f.e. fro a simulation) ultimately inherit from `DotNetWrapper`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As already mentioned the OSPSuite-R package is strongly object oriented. In R there are various object-oriented frameworks, but in the case of OSPSuite-R we are using [R6](https://r6.r-lib.org/) to create objects and work with them. Since the .NET codebase of OSPSuite is object oriented, the calls that we do through rClr have as a result the creation of objects in the .NET universe. Then we proceed to work on those objects through getters, setter, methods etc. Those objects that get passed to the R universe through rClr we encapsulate in wrappers. Our main base wrapper class for .NET is [DotNetWrapper](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite-R/blob/develop/R/dot-net-wrapper.R). All other wrapper classes for specific types of objects ( e.g. for a simulation) ultimately inherit from `DotNetWrapper`.
```

  cloneable = FALSE,
  inherit = ObjectBase,
  .
  .

```

[object-base.R](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite-R/blob/develop/R/object-base.R):
```
#' @title ObjectBase
#' @docType class
#' @description  Abstract wrapper for an OSPSuite.Core ObjectBase.
#'
#' @format NULL
#' @keywords internal
ObjectBase <- R6::R6Class(
  "ObjectBase",
  cloneable = FALSE,
  inherit = DotNetWrapper,
  active = list(
    #' @field name The name of the object. (read-only)
    name = function(value) {
      private$wrapReadOnlyProperty("Name", value)
    },
    #' @field id The id of the .NET wrapped object. (read-only)
    id = function(value) {
      private$wrapReadOnlyProperty("Id", value)
    }
  )
)
```

As you can see in the R simulation class, we provide access to simulation properties (like f.e. the simulation Output Schema) using the functionalities of the `DotNetWrapper`:

[simulation.R](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite-R/blob/develop/R/simulation.R)
```
#' @field outputSchema outputSchema object for the simulation (read-only)
outputSchema = function(value) {
    private$readOnlyProperty("outputSchema", value, private$.settings$outputSchema)
}
```

> Please not that it is a requirement for these R wrapper classes to implement a meaningful print function. In our example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that it is a requirement for these R wrapper classes to implement a meaningful print function. In our example:
```

Please also note that per convention all functions that are only used internally by the package are named starting with a dot. For example `.runSingleSimulation` and not just `runSingleSimulation`:

[utilities-simulation.R](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite-R/blob/develop/R/utilities-simulation.R)
```
.runSingleSimulation <- function(simulation, simulationRunOptions, population = NULL, agingData = NULL) {
```

The communication between R and .NET does not come without some overhead. This means that when we can avoid it we should. 

### Tasks and task caching

> Often when working with objects we use tasks. Those tasks are objects defined and created on the .NET side that are reusable and can provide functionalities on other objects. They can be accessed through the [Api.cs](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite.Core/blob/develop/src/OSPSuite.R/Api.cs) of OSPSuite.Core as usual - on the OSPSuite side they are created through the IoC container. Let's see for example how we can use the HasDimension utility function of the unit wrapper class to check if a dimension (provided as a string) is supported.

Reviewer: What is an `IoC` container? Please keep in mind that this documentation is also for R developers who might not be familiar with abbreviations use in other programming environments.

Author: added wikipedia link explaining IoC (Inversion of Control)

## Updating Core dlls

The R package keeps local copies of the necessary dlls coming from OSPSuite.Core and PK-Sim that are necessary for it to function. When a newer version of the .NET codebase is available, those dlls need to be updated semi-manually. Those dlls have to exist under [OSPSuite-R/inst/lib/](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite-R/tree/develop/inst/lib). 

The first step to updating to a newer version of Core is updating the nuget package versions to the correct version. For this you have to manually edit the version numbers in [packages.config](https://github.com/Open-Systems-Pharmacology/OSPSuite-R/blob/develop/packages.config), like the version number in OSPSuite.Core seen here underneath:

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<packages>
  .
  .
  .

  <package id="OSPSuite.Core" version="12.0.242"/>
  .
  .

</packages>
```

Then you have to go to the command line in the OSPSuite-R repository main folder and run:
```
nuget restore packages.config -PackagesDirectory packages
```

> Note that nuget has to have been added to the Path, otherwise you will need to provide the full path to nuget.exe.

Reviewer: Add a link to some web resource on how to add something to the PATH variable under windows.

Author: done
